content/projects/interactive-educational-tools.md, before:

---
title: "Interactive Educational Tools"
date: 2024-01-10
draft: false
description: "Interactive learning resources designed for accessible, engaging STEM education across multiple platforms."
---

## Overview

I build interactive tools that make complex STEM concepts easier to see and understand. They run in any modern browser and embed cleanly in Canvas or Google Classroom. The focus is on clarity, interactivity, and accessibility.

What these tools emphasize:
- Accessibility: works on common classroom devices
- Interactivity: learn by exploring, not just reading
- Visual learning: intuitive models and animations
- Easy integration: simple links or embeds in LMS

---

## Featured Educational Tools

### [Educational Image Accessibility Tool](/projects/educational-image-accessibility-tool/)
Generate high‑quality alt text, figure descriptions, long descriptions, and transcriptions for curriculum images. Built around WCAG guidelines and educational standards.

---

### [Interactive Periodic Table](/projects/interactive-periodic-table/)
Explore element properties, atomic structure, and chemical families through simple visual interaction.

Key features:
- Detail-on-hover for element information
- Family color-coding
- Works well on tablets and classroom displays

Use cases:
- Unit intro, lab reference, and periodic trends

---

### [Scale Solar System Models](/projects/solar-system-models/)
Interactive visualizations that show realistic distance and size relationships in the solar system.

Key features:
- Distance vs. size scale models
- Zoom and navigation
- Comparative visuals and orbital context

Use cases:
- Astronomy introductions and scale/proportion concepts

---

### [Interactive Moon Phase Model](/projects/moon-phase-model/)
A dynamic simulation of Earth–Moon–Sun geometry that produces lunar phases from multiple viewpoints.

Key features:
- Animated motion
- Earth and space perspectives
- Time-lapse controls and labels

Use cases:
- Lunar cycles, Earth–Moon–Sun relationships, and calendars

---

### [Articulate Rise Course Modules](/projects/articulate-rise-modules/)
Professional eLearning modules with responsive design, interactive checks, and LMS integration.

Key features:
- Mobile-responsive design
- Knowledge checks and quizzes
- SCORM/xAPI LMS integration

---

---

If you’d like to use or adapt any of these tools, feel free to reach out: [stramark@gmail.com](mailto:stramark@gmail.com)

Commit message:

tools: add Learning Objective Generator project and feature on Interactive Tools; include link in application kit PDF

content/projects/interactive-educational-tools.md, after:

---
title: "Interactive Educational Tools"
date: 2024-01-10
draft: false
description: "Interactive learning resources designed for accessible, engaging STEM education across multiple platforms."
---

## Overview

I build interactive tools that make complex STEM concepts easier to see and understand. They run in any modern browser and embed cleanly in Canvas or Google Classroom. The focus is on clarity, interactivity, and accessibility.

What these tools emphasize:
- Accessibility: works on common classroom devices
- Interactivity: learn by exploring, not just reading
- Visual learning: intuitive models and animations
- Easy integration: simple links or embeds in LMS

---

## Featured Educational Tools

### Learning Objective Generator (AI-Powered Instructional Design Tool)
This tool uses AI to reverse‑engineer measurable, standards‑aligned learning objectives from course materials (outlines, assignments, lesson text). It applies Bloom’s Taxonomy, ABCD, SMART, and Constructive Alignment principles, with exportable JSON for downstream use.

Frameworks:
- Bloom’s Taxonomy • ABCD Model • SMART Criteria • Constructive Alignment • NGSS/CCSS

Technology:
- OpenAI‑assisted text analysis • JSON outputs • Web front‑end hosted on Netlify

Try it: https://image-accessibility-tool.netlify.app/learning-objectives

---

### [Educational Image Accessibility Tool](/projects/educational-image-accessibility-tool/)
Generate high‑quality alt text, figure descriptions, long descriptions, and transcriptions for curriculum images. Built around WCAG guidelines and educational standards.

---

### [Interactive Periodic Table](/projects/interactive-periodic-table/)
Explore element properties, atomic structure, and chemical families through simple visual interaction.

Key features:
- Detail-on-hover for element information
- Family color-coding
- Works well on tablets and classroom displays

Use cases:
- Unit intro, lab reference, and periodic trends

---

### [Scale Solar System Models](/projects/solar-system-models/)
Interactive visualizations that show realistic distance and size relationships in the solar system.

Key features:
- Distance vs. size scale models
- Zoom and navigation
- Comparative visuals and orbital context

Use cases:
- Astronomy introductions and scale/proportion concepts

---

### [Interactive Moon Phase Model](/projects/moon-phase-model/)
A dynamic simulation of Earth–Moon–Sun geometry that produces lunar phases from multiple viewpoints.

Key features:
- Animated motion
- Earth and space perspectives
- Time-lapse controls and labels

Use cases:
- Lunar cycles, Earth–Moon–Sun relationships, and calendars

---

### [Articulate Rise Course Modules](/projects/articulate-rise-modules/)
Professional eLearning modules with responsive design, interactive checks, and LMS integration.

Key features:
- Mobile-responsive design
- Knowledge checks and quizzes
- SCORM/xAPI LMS integration

---

---

If you’d like to use or adapt any of these tools, feel free to reach out: [stramark@gmail.com](mailto:stramark@gmail.com)
