content/projects/solar-system-models.md, before:

---
title: "Scale Solar System Models"
date: 2024-01-10
draft: false
description: "Interactive visualizations demonstrating the true scale of our solar system's distances and planetary sizes."
---

## Overview

Understanding the true scale of the solar system is one of the most challenging concepts in astronomy education. Textbook diagrams necessarily compress distances and exaggerate planet sizes to fit on a page, inadvertently teaching students that space is much more crowded than reality. These interactive scale models help students grasp just how vast and empty our solar system truly is.

---

## The Scale Challenge

If you show the planets at their correct relative sizes, you can't show the distances—they'd extend for miles. If you show the distances to scale, the planets become invisible dots. These interactive models let students explore both scales separately and understand why we can't show both simultaneously.

---

## Model 1: Planetary Size Comparison

An interactive model showing all eight planets (plus dwarf planets) at correct relative sizes. Students can:
- See Jupiter and Saturn's enormous size compared to Earth
- Understand why terrestrial planets are called "rocky" vs. gas giants
- Compare Earth to other terrestrial planets
- Explore how small Pluto really is

**Key Learning Outcomes:**
- Relative planetary sizes
- Gas giants vs. terrestrial planets
- Scale and proportion concepts

---

## Model 2: Orbital Distance Visualization

An interactive model showing orbital distances to scale. Features include:
- Zoomable interface to navigate vast distances
- Speed controls to show orbital periods
- Distance measurements in AU (Astronomical Units)
- Time to travel at various speeds (light, spacecraft, car)

**Key Learning Outcomes:**
- Understanding astronomical distances
- Why space travel takes so long
- Empty space between planets
- Concept of Astronomical Unit (AU)

---

## Model 3: Combined Scale (Interactive Scrolling)

A scrollable webpage where students can "travel" through the solar system at a consistent scale. If Earth is the size of a marble, this shows how far they'd have to scroll to reach each planet.

**Key Learning Outcomes:**
- Visceral understanding of space emptiness
- Patience required for space exploration
- Why we can't visit multiple planets on one mission
- Scale of interplanetary distances

---

## Educational Impact

### Misconception Correction
Most students imagine the solar system as planets spaced evenly like beads on a string. These models correct that fundamental misconception.

### Proportional Reasoning
Students develop stronger proportional reasoning skills by working with extreme ratios—Jupiter is 1,300 times Earth's volume!

### Context for Space Exploration
Understanding scale helps students appreciate the incredible achievement of missions like Voyager, New Horizons, and Mars rovers.

---

## Canvas LMS Integration

These models can be embedded directly in Canvas pages or linked as external resources. Students can interact with them during class on interactive whiteboards or explore independently as homework.

---

## Future Enhancements

Planned additions include:
- Gravity simulator showing escape velocities
- Speed-of-light travel time calculator
- 3D rotation showing orbital plane inclinations
- Asteroid belt density visualization
- Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud extensions

---

## Technical Implementation

**Technologies:** JavaScript, Canvas API, CSS3 Animations, Responsive Design  
**Performance:** Optimized for smooth scrolling and zooming even on low-end devices  
**Accessibility:** Keyboard navigation, screen reader annotations, touch-friendly controls

---

## Related Tools

- [Interactive Periodic Table](/projects/interactive-periodic-table/)
- [Interactive Moon Phase Model](/projects/moon-phase-model/)
- [All Interactive Educational Tools](/projects/interactive-educational-tools/)

---

## For Educators

If you'd like to use these models in your courses or collaborate on improvements, please reach out at [stramark@gmail.com](mailto:stramark@gmail.com).

Commit message:

content: refresh Solar System Models page with new overview, project purpose, and learning goals

content/projects/solar-system-models.md, after:

---
title: "Scale Solar System Models"
date: 2024-01-10
draft: false
description: "Interactive visualizations demonstrating the true scale of our solar system's distances and planetary sizes."
---

## Overview

I designed and developed a series of interactive 3D solar system models to help astronomy students better understand the immense scale of planetary sizes and orbital distances. These models were created as part of a lab activity to make the abstract concept of astronomical scale tangible and visually intuitive.

Traditional textbook diagrams distort scale to fit the page—compressing vast distances and exaggerating planet sizes. My goal was to create accurate, interactive models that give learners a visceral sense of just how large and empty our solar system really is.

---

## Project Design & Purpose

These 3D models were built as teaching tools for integration into classroom labs and LMS platforms like Canvas, where students can explore spatial relationships interactively. Each model targets a specific learning objective aligned with NGSS space science standards and STEM visualization skills.

---

## Learning Goals

- Develop accurate conceptions of planetary scale and spacing
- Strengthen proportional reasoning through visual comparison
- Apply spatial thinking to astronomy and planetary science
- Reinforce understanding of why space travel requires vast distances and time

---

## The Scale Challenge

If you show the planets at their correct relative sizes, you can't show the distances—they'd extend for miles. If you show the distances to scale, the planets become invisible dots. These interactive models let students explore both scales separately and understand why we can't show both simultaneously.

---

## Model 1: Planetary Size Comparison

An interactive model showing all eight planets (plus dwarf planets) at correct relative sizes. Students can:
- See Jupiter and Saturn's enormous size compared to Earth
- Understand why terrestrial planets are called "rocky" vs. gas giants
- Compare Earth to other terrestrial planets
- Explore how small Pluto really is

**Key Learning Outcomes:**
- Relative planetary sizes
- Gas giants vs. terrestrial planets
- Scale and proportion concepts

---

## Model 2: Orbital Distance Visualization

An interactive model showing orbital distances to scale. Features include:
- Zoomable interface to navigate vast distances
- Speed controls to show orbital periods
- Distance measurements in AU (Astronomical Units)
- Time to travel at various speeds (light, spacecraft, car)

**Key Learning Outcomes:**
- Understanding astronomical distances
- Why space travel takes so long
- Empty space between planets
- Concept of Astronomical Unit (AU)

---

## Model 3: Combined Scale (Interactive Scrolling)

A scrollable webpage where students can "travel" through the solar system at a consistent scale. If Earth is the size of a marble, this shows how far they'd have to scroll to reach each planet.

**Key Learning Outcomes:**
- Visceral understanding of space emptiness
- Patience required for space exploration
- Why we can't visit multiple planets on one mission
- Scale of interplanetary distances

---

## Educational Impact

### Misconception Correction
Most students imagine the solar system as planets spaced evenly like beads on a string. These models correct that fundamental misconception.

### Proportional Reasoning
Students develop stronger proportional reasoning skills by working with extreme ratios—Jupiter is 1,300 times Earth's volume!

### Context for Space Exploration
Understanding scale helps students appreciate the incredible achievement of missions like Voyager, New Horizons, and Mars rovers.

---

## Canvas LMS Integration

These models can be embedded directly in Canvas pages or linked as external resources. Students can interact with them during class on interactive whiteboards or explore independently as homework.

---

## Future Enhancements

Planned additions include:
- Gravity simulator showing escape velocities
- Speed-of-light travel time calculator
- 3D rotation showing orbital plane inclinations
- Asteroid belt density visualization
- Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud extensions

---
