content/projects/space-night.md, before:

---
title: "Space Night - Annual STEM Celebration"
tags: ["stem-education", "community-engagement", "event-planning", "space-science"]
featured_image: ""
description: "A community celebration of space exploration bringing together 500+ students, families, and educators annually"
---

## Overview

Space Night is an annual spring carnival celebrating space exploration and STEM. For one evening each year, our campus becomes an interactive space science museum run by students for the community.

### Watch Space Night in Action

<div style="position: relative; padding-bottom: 56.25%; height: 0; overflow: hidden; max-width: 100%; margin: 2rem 0;">
  <iframe style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%;" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/pL3T8TqyRd0?si=4H9tVTaK8fmtgyUf" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>
## Highlights

500+ attendees each spring; 15+ years running; student-led exhibits and hands-on activities (rockets, rovers, robotics, 3D printing); telescope viewing (weather permitting) with local astronomy partners; guest speakers from NASA programs, industry, and universities; inspires K–12 students and builds strong family engagement in STEM.

---

Questions or want to host a Space Night at your school? Email me: [stramark@gmail.com](mailto:stramark@gmail.com)

Commit message:

Update Space Night content (Overview/Highlights/Role) per new copy; keep video embed; tighten style

content/projects/space-night.md, after:

---
title: "Space Night - Annual STEM Celebration"
tags: ["stem-education", "community-engagement", "event-planning", "space-science"]
featured_image: ""
description: "A community celebration of space exploration bringing together 500+ students, families, and educators annually"
---

## Overview

Space Night was a one-night community event celebrating space exploration and STEM. For a single evening, the campus transformed into an interactive space science museum designed and run by students. The event invited families, educators, and local organizations to experience hands-on learning through exploration, creativity, and collaboration.

## Watch Space Night in Action

<div style="position: relative; padding-bottom: 56.25%; height: 0; overflow: hidden; max-width: 100%; margin: 2rem 0;">
  <iframe style="position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%;" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/pL3T8TqyRd0?si=4H9tVTaK8fmtgyUf" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>
## Highlights

Attracted more than 500 attendees from across the community; featured student-built exhibits and demonstrations, including rockets, rovers, robotics, and 3D printing; included telescope viewing (weather permitting) with local astronomy partners and guest speakers from NASA programs, universities, and industry; inspired K–12 students to explore STEM pathways and strengthened community engagement in science and engineering.

## Role and Contributions

I conceived, organized, and directed Space Night from concept to completion. Responsibilities included event planning, sponsor outreach, budgeting, logistics coordination, and student training. I collaborated with faculty, local businesses, and STEM organizations to secure exhibits and guest experts. I also developed promotional materials, designed interactive learning stations, and managed more than 60 student volunteers to deliver a full-scale public STEM experience.

---

Questions or want to host a Space Night at your school? Email me: [stramark@gmail.com](mailto:stramark@gmail.com)
